---
title: "Higgs: An Introduction"
---

Physics is a fascinating branch of science--especially particle physics and astrophysics, though the latter is considered, technically, a branch of astronomy. And astronomy is the branch of science I find most compelling.

I recently watched Particle Fever, a 2013 documentary about the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN in Geneva, Switzerland. CERN, also known as The European Organization for Nuclear Research is the site of the LHC, a 17-mile particle collider created by 10,000 scientists and engineers over the course of 20-some-odd years. Considered the world’s largest “machine”, the LHC is one of humanity’s greatest scientific undertakings that will hopefully shed a strong light on one of the universe’s most fascinating mysteries.

What we know:

Particles that have mass cannot travel at the so-called “cosmic speed limit”, which is the speed of light (186, 000 miles per second). Some particles with very little mass have come close, but no matter how much you try to accelerate one, it will never reach the speed of light. Furthermore, the more mass something is made up of, the more energy it takes to move it. 

Massless particles, and there aren’t many currently known to us (photons being one of them), can travel at the speed of light—in fact, particles with no mass can only travel at the speed of light and not a tick slower. 

So why is that? What is the reason for this correlation between mass and speed? And why do particles even have mass at all? Why do some particles have more mass than others? We have solid theories to answer these questions. And because we are wonderfully curious creatures, a good theory must be tested. Enter, the Large Hadron Collider.

The theory goes something like this. There is an energy field that permeates the universe. Physicists call this field the Higgs Field. All particles interact differently with the Higgs Field depending on their mass; the more mass a particle has the more strongly it interacts with the field, thus slowing it down. Massless particles on the other hand, don’t interact with the field at all, which is why they can travel so fast and not slow down. But what’s important—and challenging—to comprehend is that all particles begin with zero mass and it’s the interaction with the Higgs Field that gives a particle mass. Stated another way, a particle’s mass is a result of its interaction with the field. This is where the limitations of our perception of reality become exposed and we begin to grapple with the very concept of mass and what exactly it is.

So, theoretically, the Higgs Field is responsible for giving mass to subatomic particles such as quarks and leptons—this is why many people, the media especially, like to use the more contentious term “God Particle” for describing the Higgs Boson, which is the smallest particle the Higgs Field is made up of.

Detecting the Higgs Boson is an arduous task, but doing so would confirm our math and the existence of the Higgs Field. Although there are many questions physicists are hoping the LHC will answer, finding the Higgs Boson is its foremost purpose. This particle collider  is essentially a round 17-mile underground tunnel. In this tunnel is a vast assortment of highly complex machinery built with the main function of accelerating particles around and around this looped tunnel until they reach speeds near that of light. Once up to sufficient speed these particles are smashed into each other, giving way to all sorts of interesting results. Highly advanced images are taken of these collisions for observation.

Though the LHC’s main objective is to confirm the presence of the Higgs Field, there are other questions scientists are hoping to have answered and other data hoping to be discovered from these particle collisions.

But what’s really exciting, as many of you may know, is that in 2012 the Higgs Boson was in fact discovered from some the the LHC’s gather data. Peter Higgs, who proposed the the likelihood of this energy field’s existence in the 1960s, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics shortly thereafter. The LHC has since been shut down and is being prepped for higher energy and luminosity which will aid CERN in gathering better data from collisions. 

As one of the physicists in the documentary put it—as of this point in time we’re pretty much in the dark as to the impact this discovery could have, other than shedding light on the universe’s origin, whether or not there is a multiverse, and other mind-bending contemplations. He used radio waves as an example and how they weren’t called radio waves when we discovered them. 

This post is, at best, a rudimentary summary of the Higgs Field and the function of the LHC. I lack the knowledge to explain things in greater detail, and the documentary does go a bit deeper into the science behind it all; though, I think they really only scratch the surface. I guess they don’t have to explain it all—there’s always curiosity and the interwebs for that!

Particle Fever is worth a viewing as it places you in the action, so to speak. You get to meet a few of the CERN crew and experience the intensity of their struggles and the exhilaration of their excruciatingly meticulous work being paid off. 

To me, there’s really nothing less interesting than the mysteries of our universe. In the humdrum of everyday routine, I think many of us forget—I certainly forget—that the existence we have lived and breathed since our earliest memories is still an un-pieced puzzle. God, that’s an incredible fact.